The robot during its navigation must be able to distinguish between a hindrance caused by an
obstacle and a wall, and should thereby react accordingly. For this, there are two ultrasonic
sensors mounted: one at lower level referred as obstacle detector and one at a height of 20 cm
from the ground referred as wall sensor. If at any point, the robot gets readings from both
obstacle sensor and wall sensor, it indicates that the obstruction encountered is a wall. If the
wall sensor does not detect a hindrance, it means the hindrance is an obstacle and not a wall.
The two behaviours of the robot have been described below:

1. Wall Hindrance: As the predetermined initial condition is assumed to have wall on the
left side and at the front after traversing, the robot will track on when the wall is found
and accordingly take a left or right turn
At the beginning the robot starts at the bottom left corner of the room (it can begin from the
right corner of the room as well if wanted). Each time a wall is encountered the robot alternates
between 180 degree turns towards right and left.
2. Obstacle Hindrance: When the robot determines that the hindrance is an obstacle, it must
navigate around the obstacle such that it still remains on its path. For this we have written a
method that enables the robot to move around the obstacle traversing three faces of the obstacle
and turning in a right, left and left for the first, second and third faces of the obstacle
respectively. Once the robot has traversed the third face of the obstacle, it takes a 90 degree
turn towards its right and the navigation process continues.

Feedback Mechanism in Obstacle Avoidance:
It is often observed that two motors given the same speeds may not make the robot move
perfectly straight and it may begin to stray from its straight trajectory towards the left or right.
This may lead to unwanted behaviour like the robot crashing into obstacles during turns,
unwanted deviation in path etc. The feedback mechanism we have used will ensure that the
robot always remains parallel to the obstacle faces while navigating around it. It is explained
in detail below
To ensure that the robot successfully navigates around an obstacle, we have set a threshold
distance of 20 cm that the robot should always maintain from an obstacle face. After every unit
interval of the robot moving forward, the obstacle ultrasonic sensor pings to recalculate the
distance. In the event that the robot drifted slightly towards the obstacle, this distance will be
less than 20 cm. In this case, we keep moving the left motor while the right motor is kept
stationary till the distance between the robot and obstacle becomes 20cm. Similarly in the event
that the robot drifted slightly away from the obstacle, this distance will be more than 20 cm.
In this case, we keep moving the right motor while the left motor is kept stationary till the
distance between the robot and obstacle becomes 20cm. In this way, the robot always maintains
a constant distance between itself and the obstacle and avoids crashing into it at any instant and
ensures a smooth navigation around the obstacle.
During the entire navigation period the robot obstacle always takes feedback from its metal
detector. At any point, it passes over a metallic object, the metal detector send a HIGH signal
to the Arduino. This signal is read and the robot is made to stop for 3 seconds after which the
robot resumes its navigation.